---
layout: posts
author: Huan
title: RNN backprop thru time(BPTT)
---

Notes on the math for RNN back propagation through time(BPTT).

---

$$\hat{y}$$  is the prediction.

$$U$$ is the weight matrix after the hidden layer.

$$\hat{y} = f_y (U h_t + b_y)$$

---

$$h_{t}$$ is the hidden layer at time t.

$$f_{h}$$ is the non linear function in the hidden layer.

$$V$$ is the weight matrix before the hidden layer.

$$W_{h_{t-1}}$$ is the weight matrix in the hidden layer at the previous time
step.

$$b_{h}$$ is the bias at the hidden layer.

$$h_{t} = f_{h} (Vx_t + Wh_{t-1} + b_{h})$$

---

No need to BPTT for this:

$$\frac{\delta L_{t}} {\delta U} =
\sum_{i=0}^{T} \frac{\delta L_i} {\delta U} =
\frac{\delta L_t} {\delta \hat{y}_t}
\frac{\delta \hat{y}_t} {\delta U}$$

---

**BPTT**

The loss at time t with respect to the weights in the hidden layer.

The terms in square brackets $$[]$$ are written in such a way the the leftmost
term is the most recent term while the rightmost is the oldest term.

$$\frac{\delta L_{t}} {\delta W} =
\frac{\delta L_{t}} {\delta \hat{y}_{t}}
\frac{\delta \hat{y}_{t}} {\delta L_{t}}
[
\frac{\delta h_{t}} {\delta W} +
(
\frac{\delta h_{t}} {\delta h_{t-1}}
\frac{\delta h_{t-1}} {\delta W} ) +
(
\frac{\delta h_{t}} {\delta h_{t-1}}
\frac{\delta h_{t-1}} {\delta h_{t-2}}
\frac{\delta h_{t-2}} {\delta W}
) + ...
]$$

$$=
\frac{\delta L_t} {\delta \hat{y}_t}
\frac{\delta \hat{y}_t} {\delta h_t}
\sum_{k=0}^{t}
[
\frac{\delta h_{t}} {\delta h_{t-1}}  
\frac{\delta h_{t-1}} {\delta h_{t-2}} ...
\frac{\delta h_{k+2}} {\delta h_{k+1}}
\frac{\delta h_{k+1}} {\delta h_k}
\frac{\delta h_k} {\delta W}
]$$

$$=
\frac{\delta L_t} {\delta \hat{y}_t}
\frac{\delta \hat{y}_t} {\delta h_t}
[ \sum_{k=0}^{t}
( \prod_{i=k+1}^{t}
\frac{\delta h_{i}} {\delta h_{i-1}} )
\frac{\delta h_k} {\delta W} ]$$

---

$$\frac{\delta L_{t}} {\delta V}$$

BPTT also needs to be done for calculating the loss with respect to weight matrix V.
The dependence between hidden units and weight matrix V is  not only in one place.
Hidden units from all the previous time steps also depend on V so we need to go
backwards in time to calculate this gradient.

---

<br>
